Desired Product:  Dashboard that quickly and effectively updates key 
stakeholders on New York City's CitiBike program.  Dashboard sections 
per stakeholder requirements will include about 15 key visualizations, 
with one specifically-requested map, and two special features.  The desired 
frequency is monthly, coinciding with the monthly operating report release.
(The latest release is May 2019).  

Rationale:  Why This?  Although key statistics are provided in monthly 
written reports currently, key stakeholders need a faster way to 
consume the information in order to stay informed about the program.

Why Us?  Expertise with Tableau enables us to build this product quickly 
and effectively.

Why Now?  After five years in operation, the "newness" of the program is 
wearing off.  As a result, more effort is needed to maintain stakeholder 
attention, especially since the program will likely still face some 
growing pains that require significant stakeholder action.  

Communication Strategy:

The three key messages we want to convey are:
1)  The program is still growing and changing significantly -- so 
stakeholders need ot pay attention to it.  Because our stakeholders are
principally in government, we want to address the pain point of the fear of
surprise.
2)  The program is operating well but faces challenges -- so that stakeholders 
wish to continue their association, and are willing to commit resources to 
overcome obstacles.  We want to address the pain point of the fear of being 
on board a sinking ship.
3) The pgoram has quantified benefits -- so that stakeholders find it easy 
to take credit in a strong way.  We want to provide a variety of arguments 
for supporting the program that stakeholders can make quantitatively.

Layout:  The key layout will be a dashboard with five pages.
Pages 1 and 2 will address our #1 communication goal
Page 3 will address goal #2
Page 4 will address goal #3
Page 5 will address a "special topic" (this was requested specifically)

A specific map has been requested relateing to the program operation, so that 
map will go on page 3, which covers the operations topic.

For each page, there will be about 3 visualizations -- the front page will have
fewer, larger visualizations to better emphasize pooint #1, which will get 
two pages because of its importance. 

Although we might normally give higher priority to communicating the benefits of 
the program, because the program has been around for some time and most stakeholders 
have been exposed to it repeatedly, the benefits are already well known.  The benefits 
therefore are more of a reminder for most stakeholders, whereas the "latest" will 
be more attention-getting.  

Key Visualizations:

Page 1:  Growth Is Happening!

1) Daily average trip growth -- a simple bar graph with values to emphasize 
that the program is still in its growth phase.  To reduce clutter,
values will be tool-tips.  The caption will put the year-over-year growth
number.  Comparisons will be seasonally adjusted.

Data strategy:  Download Q2 csv daily summary files for past five years plus current year,
use union to import to Tableau, have Tableau aggregate

Communication strategy: Average daily rides communicates the scale of the program.  On 
a monthly basis, it is subject to seasonality and variations in weekday / weekend 
prevalence.  The message we want to get across is that this program continues to 
grow, and based on its recent past, it can grow a lot.

2) Year over year trip and subscriber growth, year-to-date -- dual line graph 
with synchronized axes showing year-over-year growth in each month.  

Data strategy:  Download quarterly csv daily summary files for Q1 and Q2 2018 and 2019, merge 
via union in Tabluea.  Tableau will aggregate.  

Communication strategy:  May YoY growth in trips is unusually low compared to other 
months in 2019.  We want to remind people that subscriber growth is a steady 
15-20% YoY, and that in some months we've seen 35% YoY growth.  In other words, 
big growth (and big impacts) are still on the way ...

Page 2:  When and Where is Growth Happening?  

3) Year-over-year growth map.  Use divergent color to distinguish stations 
with trip growth vs those with a decline.  

Date strategy:  Analyze individual trip data for previous month and year-ago month. 
Use a Jupyter notebook to make an ETL pipeline that provides an hourly summary by station. 
Doing so will reduce the size of the ride dataset from about 2 million rows to about 
300k.  The smaller size makes it much faster for Tableau to handle.  The hourly 
datasets can be imported into Tableau via union and analyzed there.  

Communication strategy:  A geographic breakdown helps officials know where to 
deploy resources.  In particular, we want to show that some parts of the city are 
experiencing rapid growth, so even though overall growth is 5-30% per year, in some 
parts of the city, growth is rapid and there is potential for rapidly changing impacts.

4) Comparison of usage times:  Two line graphs, one for weekdays and one for weekends, 
that show total trips based on the hour of the day.  Each graph compares the pattern 
in the current year vs the previous year.  

We will not have actions on this page, because we don't want the users to stop 
and explore here, we want them to move on and get our other messages... 

Data strategy:  Uses the same hourly data from before (trips are defined based on 
where and when they start).  With hourly data, Tableau can aggregate easily.

Communication strategy:  We want to highlight that growth patterns on weekdays and 
weekends are quite different.  So even though impacts on weekdays may have stabilized, 
there is a significant change happening on weekends that officials need to be aware of. 
These graphs also help officials to be aware of when usage is at a maximum, to help 
keep the system operating smoothly. 

Page three -- operational excellence

5)  Trip start and end maps -- two maps (with zip code overlays) showing the 
total number of trip starts and trip ends by station, coded with a divergent 
color scheme to separate stations with high traffic from those with low traffic.  
A slider will enable either current year or previous year data to be viewed 
interactively.  

Data strategy:  Use the same hourly data, but include in the ETL pipeline an 
hourly compilation of trips by station end-point, not just starting-point.  Use 
Jupyter Notebook and Tableau as before with this data set.

Communication strategy:  We want to remind stakeholders that the usage patterns 
vary greatly from one station to another.  Some stations are very busy, we want 
these to stand out.  Fortunately, the skewed data distribution does this with just 
a linear colormap.  

6) Station peak departures in 2019 and 2019.  This bar chart will initially show 
stations ranked by their maximum number of trip starts in any given hour, and compare 
this "peak" value between 2019 and 2018.  A map action will filter the list to show 
any given station if the stakeholder clicks on that station.  

Data strategy:  the hourly data as constructed for other purposes will enable this one 
also, with Tableau handling the aggregation and filtering

Communication strategy:  A very busy station is an operational risk, but what the 
data shows is that although system usage is increasing overall, the busiest stations 
got less busy in 2019 (for instance, adding more stations nearby helped to reduce peak 
traffic at many of the businest stations.)  This illustrates how the program is being 
managed well.  The map action here allows stakeholders to linger, or zero in on 
stations of particular interest to them.  

Page four -- benefits  

7)  CO2 emissions reduced -- a simple bar graph showing how much CO2 emissions 
have been reduced on a monthly basis, comparing this year to previous years.  

Data strategy:  the daily summary provides an estimate of total miles traveled.  
In Tableau, we can calculate a field to convert this to CO2 savings, based on 
the fact that we are displacing a mix of travel.  Based on previous studies of 
travel in New York City, the area served by the program mainly uses subways / rail 
(80%) and buses (20%) for the kind of trips that bike travel likely displaces.  
Most car trips are over much greater distances than bikes cover, and taxi trips are 
a very small percentage (too small to matter given the approximations involved).  
Bike travel does produce some indirect CO2 emissions (about 20 g/mile) and these 
are taken into account to be conservative.  (The net savings is about 100 g per 
mile traveled.) 

Communications strategy:  CO2 reduction is getting a lot of attention at the local 
level currently, so this metric is important for stakeholderrs to know.  The 
graph needs to be simpe so as to give stakeholders one easy-to-remember number.  

8) Commuters using the program -- a graph showing how many people are using the 
program to commute to work, comparing the current and previous year. 

Data strategy:  Looking at the hourly data, it is possible to identify the "commuter 
spike" that happens only on weekdays during commuting hours.  The morning spike 
is sharpest; it stands out against a constinuously increasing baseline that appears 
linear on weekends.  To get this estimate, we can use another ETL that will take 
the output from the hourly analysis and add up the trips in the "commuter spike", 
subtracting out the baseline.  The result is a daily estimate of the number of 
commuters.  This daily data is then easily imported into Tableau.  THe calculation 
can be done for the current year and compared to the previous year.  Growth in 
this case is less important than showing that usage is consistent, so two years 
should be sufficient.  The number of daily commuters tends to have a skewed distribution, 
because adverse weather occasionally results in very low numbers, so the median 
is the best measure.  

Communication strategy:  Here we want to make a different kind of argument than 
is typically associated with CO2.  We want to point out that a commuter on a bike 
is saving the city resources by not using crowded subways, buses, etc. at peak times.  
Again, we want a simple argument -- here's how many fewer commuters were packed into 
the subway at peak hours due to this program.

9) Weight gain avoided -- a graph showing the health benefits of the program for 
the riders.  

Data strategy:  The milesage data can be used with a simple formula to determine 
calories burned, and from known data on weight loss, how many pounds of weight gain 
were avoided.  This measure is difficult to quantify exactly, but it is easy for 
stakeholders to understand how riding a bike will avoid weight gain, and to intuit that 
weight gain ultimately will cost the city health dollars.  Pounds of weight gain 
avoided is also a big number, so it's useful for arguing persuasively for an impact.  
There are many other benefits, such as a 40% reduction in risk of heart disease and 
cancer, but these are more difficult to put into a simple chart that reflects a 
single month of data (these effects take many years).  Avoided weight gain, however, 
is immediate.

Communications strategy:  We want an argument that is simple, but different than 
an environmental or infrastructure argument, but that is easy to relate to.  

Page five -- special topic

Gender equality has been chosen as a special topic because of the high level of 
attention is has been getting.  

10) Geography of women bike riders -- an interactive map that uses the same 
color scheme as the others, but shows the percentage of riders that identify as 
female, and lets stakeholders compare 2018 and 2019.  It shows that in many places 
the majority or riders are women.  

Data strategy:  as part of hourly data processing, the fraction of riders that
identify as female can be computed per station per hour.  In Tableau, a special 
aggregation formula that weights the hourly data on a per ride basis can be used 
to get aggregate percentages.

Communication strategy:  As a special topic at the end of the visualization, this 
one can be designed to allow the stakeholders to explore.  The message we want 
to get across is that women are an important bike-riding constituency.  

11) Graph of women rider percentage by day of week, current and previous year. 
This plot is linked to the map so that if the stakeholder clicks on a particular 
station, the data can be shown for that particular station.  

Data strategy:  Tableau can aggregate using the aforementioned data.

Communication strategy:  The data shows that women riders are a significantly 
higher (and growing) percentage of weekend riders.  This helps to link the
"special topic" to the "main topic" of growth, because weekend riders are a 
growth area, and the gender of weekend riders is more balanced, so stakeholders 
can realize that women riders represent an important growth avenue.  We leave 
this up to the stakeholder to figure out, so that they can have some ownership 
of the analysis. 










Data cleaning:

Quarterly data for q2 2019 (daily summary) has an extra column "Column1" (undefined
entered in all rows) -- this column was manually deleted because Tableau could 
not merge with other years when it was present


